After the Curran faction called off the spring
strike in 36, what did you and Curran do in the time
before the fall strike was called? We kept making
plans and making contacts with the seamen aboard
the ship,
getting them to join the organization. This still
meaning the old ISU? No, this meant the new group,
really. Well, we
were trying to get, yes, we were trying to get these
people active in the old ISU.
I forget, I don't remember how long this went on,
but at one point we had to break it off because while
the rank-and-file took over the activities of the
Union, the AFL
did not recognize the rank-and-file groups. For
example,
there was a group controlling each one of these,
the decks, stewards, and engine departments. a
rank and file group controlling the actual
meetings, but the old officials still control the
money and the office. Why do you think at this time,
particularly after the spring strike, that the
upper echelons of the ISU didn't change their
tune? Could they not recognize what was
happening, or did they not care?
Carlson, Grains, Charlsburg, this group? It's my
own opinion and I can't prove this again that they
were too close to the Steamship Company
officials. During this time between the strikes
did they ever come to you and ask for your help? No.
No? No. I became an outcast really as far as they
were concerned.
Once the Really, I became an outcast when we had
that strike aboard the U.S. line ships, the radio
operators. I would have nothing more to do with
them then. Were you at the famous
Union-Cooper meeting? I was, indeed. Could you
explain that, or describe that, please? Could you
describe the meeting?
Or the preparation that went into it? No, I can't. I
don't remember the details of it. You don't
remember if, well, when Turen made his entrance
around 10 o'clock at night, had he been already
tutored
by someone to use the tactics that he did? Or was
this a spontaneous outburst by the dissident
members who were outside the Union? Well,
Joe and I came into that meeting together, but I
don't remember any of the details of it. I really
don't. I just don't remember them.
I can see the old building. I don't remember even
how we came into that meeting now. When was it, or do
you know, an approximate time when Curran and his
group and your South decided that it was time to
found a new union, that they actually gave up on the
old ISU?
I would say just before the 37th strike.
It was perfectly clear. I don't remember the
details of what went on now, but that group went to
the AFL-CIO in Washington to visit with the Green
about the conditions that existed in the three
branches and the officials and how they were
disregarding the wishes of the members. And the
AFL, of course, said, no soap. They're the
officials, and they put another man in charge. And
I can't remember his name. You mentioned Hunter.
That's not his name. Anyway, the AFL put another
person in charge of the seafaring unions, not one
of the old elected officials.
And that person took the position of the old
officials against the rank and file. I want to say
Hunter. I think Hunter may have been his name, but
I'm just not sure of that. But that'll show up
somewhere in some of the stuff that you get into.
Did you have anything to do with the curing groups
activities as far as the Copeland Continuous
Discharge book goes? I went with the group to
Washington. Who organized this? Was this Kern or
was this Patty Wayland? Who was the spearhead for
this march on Washington? Joe Kern. Joe Kern was?
Joe Kern was the spearhead for everything that
took place. He was the leader. And as far as I was
concerned, the important thing was to build him
up, to make him the leader, because you can't take
over a movement without a leader. And he was the
natural person to do this. Did the Communists also
recognize this? Oh yes, yes. They recognized this
immediately. So in your opinion then during this
time period there were two factions who were vying
for Curran's ear?
The basic rank and file and of course the
Communists were trying to influence everything
he did and they did influence him a lot. There's no
question about that. They influenced me a lot.
Fortunately, we both had enough understanding to
realize that we didn't want
communism.
That was not what we were working for in these
United States, and the thing we were working for
with the seamen was literally to improve their
conditions. We were not working to build a a
communist government in the United States or a
communist party in the United States. We were
working to help seamen.
And as far as I was concerned, the unlicensed
seamen needed help just as bad as the radio
operators did. And if the radio operators were
ever going to get anywhere, you had to have all of
the people on the ship organized.
At this time when the rank and file was considering
a national convention and before the National
Maritime Union was named as such, did you and
Curran and other groups ever approach John L.
Lewis and his Committee for Industrial
Organization before he actually founded the CIA?
No, not until after it was formed.
Do you have any idea where or from whom the name
National Maritime Union came from? I don't
remember. No, I really don't. I just don't
remember.
I don't remember whether we came up with that name
before the convention or during the convention. I
really don't remember. My main job during the
convention was working on the Constitution, and I
just don't remember the genesis of the National
Maritime Union. Ed, you were on the
Constitutional Committee. Yes. How influential
was William Merrill's standard on this? What? How
influential? in the writing of the Constitution
was standard?
I would say not very much. Not very much. Who
actually put together most of the Constitution?
Who was responsible for it? Myself and a
communist. I can't think of his name. I can see him.
Huh? Doyle? What? Doyle? No. No? No. He was a little
slight man. He worked for the NMU after that as a
researcher.
I know him. I can see the man, but I can't think of his
name. But he and I did most of the work on the
Constitution. He was a communist at the time, and I
knew he was a communist at the time. What was a,
what was, What was the purpose of writing the 37th
Constitution in such a way that it had so many
democratic,
or why was it such a democratic document? Was this
purposely written into the amendments? Well, I
guess it's because we got out the AFL-CIO, the AFL
Constitution and the Declaration of
Independence. And that's what we wrote the
Constitution by. Were any of these amendments of
it that were proposed written up specifically as a
counterforce to the old ISU Constitution and the
abuses that had been rendered under it? Our
primary purpose in writing the Constitution was
to give the membership control of the union. That
was our primary objective in writing that
Constitution. That was Joe's and my primary
thing. Joe said that he wanted to come out of this
with a constitution where the membership
controlled the union. How much input did Curran
have in the constitution before it was presented
to the convention? Everything that we wrote, we
checked with Joe. Everything. Who else looked at
it beforehand, also for tacit approval? Bill
Standard looked at it. He had very little to do with
the original drafting. The final drafting, he had
a lot to do with.
Standard wasn't even in our meetings. Myself and
this one guy, and I can't think of his name to save my
life, and I've known him for all this time. I think
he may be dead now, but I know he's not active in NMU.
Tommy, first name was Tommy, I'll think of it. Not
Ray? Tommy Ray. Tommy Ray? That's the man, Tommy
Ray.
He and I had
most of the input into that Constitution. Why did
you? And our sole purpose Joe and I had discussed
this many times, and we had discussed it with the
communists. This Roy Hudson, his name was. We
discussed it with him. How about Al Lannan? Did he
have much input at this time? None. None? None. Al
Lannan came along much later. Much later. Tommy
Ray, though, did have input into it. Whether
Hudson had input into it through Ray, I don't know.
I suspect he did, but I don't know. But in any event,
Joe and I, in our discussion, we did not discuss any
specific thing in the Constitution. We discussed
only the principle. We wanted full and complete
and final say and control of the membership.
That's number one.
So I dug out the AFL Constitution. I took our
Constitution, of course, the ARTA, and the
Declaration of Independence. Were the three
major documents you used to put together? That was
the three major documents, and that was what we
worked for. And I remember that we did not want to
use a very radical clause in the preamble of the AFL
Constitution. There was a very radical clause in
there. I can't remember now what it was. But
anyway, we thought that was a little too
communist.
And it wasn't a communist document at all, of
course. As far as the Constitution goes in the
first part, why did you include, and this is what
makes the document so famous, why did you include
as a part of the membership no discrimination as to
race, creed, and color? Was this felt to be
important at the time? Yes, we felt it was
important because we felt that as long as any one
person wasn't free as a merchant seaman, as free as
the others, no discrimination against them, no
one was.
It's a very basic fact that freedom flows
from freedom of everyone. As long as you're not
free to do something that I'm free to do, I'm not
free to do that thing somewhere down the line. Why
did the Union, almost from its inception, have
such a liberal policy toward blacks?
Wasn't this sort of a risky situation for the Union
to take on at this time? Yes, it was. But again,
black workers are competing against white
workers for jobs. And these jobs, we felt that
these jobs should be free for everyone. Was this
prevalent in the industry at this time? No. I mean,
the idea of black workers competing against white
workers. No, it was very segregated. The only
black workers in the industry were in the stewards
department. They were segregated into that
department. And...
So then this clause wasn't put in the Constitution
to, as a type of lip service. It was sincerely...
No, it was put in there because we felt very
strongly that you could not build a union which was
controlled by the membership as long as you
permitted discrimination against any person.
Was there any one person who was insistent on the
race clause being included there in the
membership requirements? More or less, was there
anyone who really pressed this issue strongly?
The communist faction or the rank-and-file
faction or an individual? Well, I would say that
Joe and I pressed the faction, but the communists
also pressed it. So there was no argument over
that? It was just agreement? No, there was never
any argument over that issue when the
organization was set up. There became some
arguments over it later on. But fortunately,
I've been fortunate enough to locate some
material by an economist called Van Mises, Von
Mises, did you ever hear of him? Ludwig Von Mises.
He's from the Austrian School of Economics.
I would say after Adam Smith, he was probably the
greatest economist that ever existed.
And one thing that he did in his work, particularly
that dealing with human action was to emphasize
how you maintain freedom.
He dwelt on this considerably. Fortunately, I was
able to have
been subjected to some of his writings.
He takes the whole thing of freedom back to free
enterprise, where it really begins. Unless
businesses are free, workers can't be free.
Unless workers are free, business can't be free.
And he tied these two together in such simple terms
and simple examples that even I could understand
them. And he influenced you then? He definitely
did influence me. And he was, of course, a strong
anti-communist. And he also wrote some material
on why socialism can't exist, why business has to
be free. And of course, he dealt with the fact that
businesses are too stupid to really maintain
their freedom because they take every
opportunity they can to reach into the government
tills and avoid being free instead of really
working for free enterprise like they should. But
that definitely influenced me.
I don't know. Joe had no background on this except,
I guess, hard experience, and he just said,
right from the very first, he said, I don't see
colors.
If the fellow happens to be sitting across from me
and happens to be black or yellow, I don't see his
color, I see the man. And that was always his
position. And one thing that a Negro had better
understand about Joe Curran in the union is that
you don't come in talking to him about
discrimination going on in the union from his
office. If a man came in with a legitimate
complaint about an agent or anyone else
discriminating against him, he got full hearing,
of course, and showed me where he did it. But I was in
Joe's office once when a Negro came in and started
ranting and inferred that Joe was
discriminating. Joe just got up out of his chair
and went over and got him by the collar and by the
seat of the pants and moved him out the door, said,
don't ever come back.
Joe literally did not see colors.
It just was not in him to discriminate against
anybody. After the convention and the
Constitution,
who did you go to for national affiliation? Did you
go to Green first in the AFL or directly to Lewis and
the CIO? The organization never went back to
Green, as I remember. And they were never courted
by Green? Never what? Courted? No. I don't think
so. If they were, I don't remember it. After the
convention and the Constitution, how is your
relationship with the Union? Are you still a
president of the ARTA, or have you dropped this
affiliation in ? I dropped the affiliation of the
ARTA when I didn't run again for president. But how
do you mean? Am I a member of the ARTA or the NMU or
what? Right. I'm a member of both of them. member of
both of the unions. I'm an honorary lab member of
both of them. But I never joined the NMU. This was a
convention
action that made me honorary lab member. But your
activities then would be specifically with the
NMU after the convention and the Constitution, as
far as your employment and? No, I was never
employed by the NMU. Or you would be strictly in an
advisory? When I left the ARTA, I took a six months
leave. In other words, I just didn't do anything.
It was my intention not to do anything for six
months. At the end of the first month, I couldn't
sit still. I had to find a job. So my wife said, well,
why don't you just take another month before you
start looking? So I said, well, I can't stand it.
But anyway, I went for three months before I
started looking. And the first man I went to gave me
a job. So I went to Standard Oil of New Jersey, a
fellow by the name of Hague. And the reason I went to
him was, Because of my knowledge of him as being
president of the ARTA, I saw how he worked amongst
the ship owners. And he was the leader of that
group. And almost anything he said went. What time
would this be? Oh, this was 19, it would be 19,
from about 1937. I think
I left in 1937. I don't remember now the date.
Well, anyway, while I was still president of the
ARTA, I went to meetings of ship owners, you know,
between ship owners and the unions. And he was the
basic leader of the group. So I went to him and told
him that I was looking for a job. He had one that I
wanted. He said, you've got it. What is it? I told
him what I wanted to do was to head up their radio
department. He said, fine. I never did one thing in
the radio department, not one thing. He said,
well, the first thing I want you to do is to make a
trip around the country to all of our offices and to
all of our ships that happen to be in port. I want you
to look at the conditions that exist, talk with the
people in these offices and see what they think of
the conditions that exist on the ships, whether or
not changes should be made and so forth. Come back
and report to me. Then we will get down to your
specific assignment." I came back and reported to
him, told him what I thought ought to be done. He
says, it'll be done. I had men put on the ship to make
surveys that I outlined as to what they should do.
This is after the NMU is founded? Beg your pardon?
This is after the NMU is founded? This was after the
NMU was founded, yes. What was your reaction in
Standard Oils, and I guess the NMUs, to Lundberg's
founding of the SIU in 1938?
Well, we knew that it was founded by the ship
owners.
And of course, I learned specifically yes that it
was when I got into Standard Oil. The main
supporter was Eastern Steamship Company then,
and there was one other, Isthmian Line, U.S.
Steel. They were the ones who really paid for it.
They footed the bills.
Did Curran try to seek Lundberg's help out, or did
he ever? He did. And what was the result of
that? My own analysis at the time was that Lundberg
was a very insecure person.
And he saw in Joe Curran
the growth of a very dynamic leader. And I think, I
still think this was the problem. What about Harry
Bridges?
Harry Bridges was interested in two things.
Advancing the Communist Party
and keeping Harry Bridges in charge.
So is it your opinion then that, or do you think that
Curran was a Communist Party member? Curran?
Excuse me, Bridges. Yes, I know he was. Well, I
don't know it. He said he was. He told you then? Oh,
yes. He made no bones of it amongst the people he
knew.
What about, could we move on to the 1939 per se? It
seems to be a very important year as far as the
National Maritime Union goes. Specifically, Do
you have any thoughts or any recollections of the
Mariners Club?
No, just generally basically what they tried to
do. You say the 1939, you're talking about the
convention? Well, and the tanker strike, the
convention, the Mariners Club, the five points
program. At this time you were employed by
Standard Oil? 1939, yes, I was with Standard Oil.
And so your affiliation, you weren't that close to
Nicaran? I was always very close to Curran. And in
an advisory capacity? Or more as a friend? More as a
friend. He would discuss with me problems when he
wanted my advice. Okay. Tuning in then on the
tanker strike of 39, first of all, why do you think
it came about? And what was Kieran's stand on the
strike?
I think it came about because of stupidity of the
Communist Party. The Communists were in strong
position in the NMU. There were more Communist
officials in the NMU than there were
non-Communists.
And they forced the strike because of, I think,
stupidity.
Again, Tommy Ray played, tried to play a very
important part in that thing. He tried to prevent
that strike. He told them. Matter of fact, he told
me just exactly what would happen. I didn't think
it would happen that way. I was still with Standard
Oil. He said, the strike will take place, the
people will pile off the ships, and the company
will have the ships manned, and there'll be very
few, if any, delays in it. And the strike will be
lost, and we'll lose our contract in this company.
And I said, well, I agree with you that you're going
to lose the contract. But I didn't think that you
would get the seamen to pile off. I thought they
would stay aboard the Standard Oil or New Jersey
ships. Anyway, the rest of the Communist Party and
Joe said that we just, I guess we just have to have
the strike. I don't see any way we can prevent it. So
he wasn't in favor of the strike? He was not in favor
of it because he'd already worked out an agreement
with the company. The agreement was that the
Instead of, the
real fight was over the Union Hall, shipping
through the Union Hall. So he had worked out an
agreement with Haig that the company would call
the Union Hall and the seaman then would go
directly to the company's office and from that
company's office to the ship. The Union didn't
want that. The communists didn't want that. They
wanted the man to go direct from the Union to the
ship instead of the company. Why do you think
Standard Oil took that position? What? Why did
Standard Oil take that position? Because this was
a procedure that they had always followed. This
was where their records for the seamen started
out. And when the seamen came ashore from the ship,
that's where their records were kept. And this was
the way they operated. Now, they could have moved
that office over to Bayonne, where the ship was.
But if the ship goes somewhere else, the man would
have to go to Bayonne. They had determined that
this was the most centralized part to handle it. It
wasn't uptown. It was downtown, where it was
handed to the seamen. And Joe recognized this. And
that's why he agreed to this particular thing.
Once the 39th strike started, what was Standard
Oil's position? Did they want to break the strike
then, or did they want to continue relations? No,
no. They said that
we offered the Union what we considered to be a fair
situation.
Joe considered it to be a fair situation. You
approved of it as being a fair situation to me.
And we won't accept less. If that means tying up our
ships for months, we'll tie them up for months.
It's that simple. Once the strike started, that
was it. They would have no more use for a national
union? No. The Union will not back up its leader. We
can't back up its leader, and we're not going to buy
the leader.
Do you think at any time Standard Oil would have
wanted to force the strike? No, not at that time.
They would have been happy with the contract. They
were happy with it. Yes. I would say that there were
some people in Standard Oil who were not happy with
it, but Bob Haig was head of the Marine Department,
and he was happy with it, and that's what counted.
Didn't Haig die during the strike? No, he died in
1940. I
think it was 1940. I may be wrong. He may have died
during that strike, but I don't believe he did. Why
do you think the Union lost the strike? Because
they called it. They just didn't have the
resources? No, they didn't have the resources,
didn't have the ability to fight Standard Oil.
They had no access to the plant where the ships
dock.
Standard Oil had a ship with it, would bring strike
breakers aboard and house them on that ship, feed
them on that ship, ship, another ship come in and
take them right off of it and put it on it.
I'd like to mention some names and if you had any
comments on them as our insights on them um
ferdinand smith how important was he in the union
ferdinand smith was an incompetent ass he was put
in the position solely because he was a negro and
the most prominent negro in the group by whom who
placed him now who supported him joe supported him
Did Smith play any large part in the Union's
desegregation stand? No, he did not. He was a
figurehead? He was a pure figurehead. He had no
ability or no nothing. He was really an impediment
to the Union's growth, his incompetence.
Could you give some examples of that, or what are
you feeling? Well, it was just general
incompetence. He really had no expertise in
anything. As Secretary of Treasury, he couldn't
write a letter, he couldn't make a financial
statement, he couldn't do anything. Why did the
party push him then? Well, there was no one else to
push. And they felt they needed a black... They
felt they needed a black person. What about
Blackie Myers?
Black and Myers had a great personality,
but that really is all he had, too, was
personality.
He really had no competence handling business in
the organization, but the seamen liked him. He was
well liked by the seamen. Did he have much input
with Joe? Well, of course, he would talk to Joe
about anything and everything that he wanted to.
But when it came down to really coming up with
important decisions, he just wasn't there. He
didn't have that kind of ability. He could, for
example, if it was routine matters of settling
beefs on a ship that a seaman had, he could do that.
And he normally did not do it by referring to the
agreement. He did it through his personality,
pure and simple. And he could get a seaman to do
almost anything. So he was a type of dynamic
personality like Joe Kern as far as the rank and
following. Yes, he was. He was a very personable,
very personable person. What about Jack
Lawrenson?
Jack Lawrenson at that time was the best educated
of the seafaring group in the leadership.
But he had some problems. Drinking being one. The
other one wanting to work at night instead of in the
daytime.
Another one chasing girls. Not that I'm against
any of these things, understand, but he put them
ahead of work. Don't let work interfere with my
pleasure.
But as far as actual academic training, he was by
far ahead of any of us. How did Myers and Smith and
Lawrenson, how did they get into the upper
brackets of the leadership in the union? Well, I
think basically because of Communist Party
support.
Figureheads, or were they the driving force? Or
was there someone behind pushing them up? I don't
know, really. But I think the party is the one who
got them to run. This I don't know. But I think
knowing as much as I do about the party, I would
assume. that this is the way it happened, but I
don't know that. M.
Headley Stone came from a Great Lakes ship,
and he worked himself up through the by being
active on the lakes and then coming into
headquarters. I don't know how he was brought into
headquarters. I don't remember.
I should, but I don't. I just don't remember. But
Headley was an able person.
He, when an idea was, he was good on raising ideas.
He was a thinking person. He was an idea person, and
he would come up with ideas, and he had good
positions when he came up with them, and if you came
up with ideas, he had good positions on them. He was
an able person, but he had family problems that
ruined his career.
Excuse me, what about Neil Hanley? Neil Hanley. I
would say that Neal was just a... I don't really
know how Neal Hanley ever got elected to anything,
really. Joe Stack? Joe Stack was a party hack.
He had some personality traits that helped him, I
think, but that's about all.
when he and Joe had the showdown. It was one vote
apart.
Have you had any input on that situation? Just
other than reading the minutes of the convention.
Well, at the convention, I don't remember what the
issue was now. Do you recall what the issue was from
reading?
Procedurally, in the convention, I believe, it
was the first time that Statt challenged his
curing. Well, anyway, whatever it was. Wasn't
there also a wage dispute or contract at the time? I
don't remember the issue. I don't remember what it
was. But the party guys lined up against Joe. And
Joe went down the line of the guys who were leading
from the floor, the party guys. They were well
planted on that floor. And he referred to each one
of them. One of the guys tried to be an actor and
failed. And he said, part-time actor, so-and-so,
this is his position. Joe then went on around all of
them. And Joe stacked, this is his position. My
position is a very, very simple one. I'm
interested in the seamen and interested in the
Union. I'm not interested in the Communist Party
as such. I have never fought the Communist Party in
this Union, as long as they fought for issues that
would help the seamen. I've understood all along
that their only interest in building this Union is
to build a power base for themselves. I've never
stood in their way to do that as long as they worked
for the betterment of the union. But anyway, when
it was all over, and I'll never understand this in
my life, why the party let it happen. The Honest
Ballot Association counted the ballots, and
there was one vote difference. Curran won by one
vote. And not a one of those party guys asked for a
recount. Most stupid thing, Joe and I talked about
that for a long time after he got away with it. I was
still with Standard Oil at the time, but I happened
to be at the convention. How long did you stay
affiliated with Standard Oil? I left there at the
end of 1940. 1940? No.
Maybe it was 1939. It was 1939 I left.
left Standard Oil. So, so Haig would have had to die
in 39. I went with the Actors Union in 1940, and
I left there. I was, I took, I signed a one-year
contract with the Actors Union, and that was in
1940 sometime, and I left there in 1941 sometime.
Did you go back to NMU then? No. When I left there, I
set up